:date: 2011-01-20

The Apparent Complexity of a Saxophone
======================================

.. figure:: images/sax.jpg 
  :width: 250px
  :align: left
  :target: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Saxophone_alto.jpg

  by `altarex@wikipedia.org <http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Saxophone_alto.jpg>`_


It's been a year since I started playing saxophone. Considering that I practice
some mediocre 2 to 5 hours a week, I still have a lot to learn. 

The first time I saw a saxophone I was impressed and intimidated by the
complexity of the instrument. It can be perceived as beautiful from afar but
once I tooke a closer look, I saw a very complex system of rods and levers
mounted with springs. Almost as if some mad scientist designed it in his worst
nightmare. 

This apparent complexity of a saxophone disappears after a couple of days with
the instrument. At this point one can start producing some tolerable sound and
make an attempt at playing a simple melody or a scale. 

The main principle of a saxophone is simple. To put it shortly a saxophone is a
cone with holes that you can close. When all the holes are closed, you get the
longest cone, producing the lowest note. The complex mechanism allows a human,
using 8 fingers (left thumb controls the octave key and the right thumb holds
the instrument), control 24 holes at the same time without moving much.  Just
watch `Charlie Parker play`_ and look how his fingers are barely moving and yet
he's playing very fast.




The Apparent Simplicity of a Trumpet
------------------------------------

.. figure:: images/trumpet.jpg 
  :width: 350px
  :align: right
  :target: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Trumpet_1.jpg
  
  by `PJ@wikipedia.org <http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Trumpet_1.jpg>`_

On the other hand, a trumpet seems to be much simpler, having only three
valves. But this apparent simplicity hides such a complexity that I was unable
to play it, not even a scale. It required much more work. 

Basically, a trumpet is a long cylinder. The length of a cylinder is controlled
by the valves. Pressing each valve makes the cylinder longer. If you push all
three valves down you get the longest cylinder producing the lowest note. All
possible combinations of valves gives us only 7 chromatic notes (one full
chromatic scale has 12 notes). To play higher, a trumpet player must extract
other harmonics by changing his lips tension. I hope you understand the
complexity of note extraction on a trumpet. 


In the end both instruments can be played and produce beautiful music. My point
is that in life this same pattern can be found elsewhere, when the apparent
complexity hides a very powerful and simple to use mechanism, and when the
apparent elegance and simplicity hides a difficult and incomprehensible
mechanism. We often get seduced by the "trumpets" discarding the "saxophones". 


To learn more, there are very good articles on `saxophone acoustics`_ and on
`brass acoustics`_ at UNSW.


.. _saxophone acoustics: http://www.phys.unsw.edu.au/jw/saxacoustics.html

.. _brass acoustics: http://www.phys.unsw.edu.au/jw/brassacoustics.html

.. _Charlie Parker play: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DjElQ6Ekr9o
