:date: 2008-12-31

Optimize your browsing with Vimperator
======================================

I'm a Vim user and write code in it all the time at work and at home. I enjoy
its modal interface which gives the keyboard much more power. I always miss it
in other applications and apparently I'm not alone. Martin Stubenschrott
created a Firefox add-on called `Vimperator <http://vimperator.mozdev.org/>`__
which makes the browser modal with Vim inspired key bindings.

Being modal, Vimperator requires some learning before doing some basic
navigation with the promise to make the browsing more effective. Once the
basics are acquired you can continue to optimize your browsing. The basic idea
is in 3 steps:

  1. Always look for patterns in your own browsing.
  2. Once a pattern is identified find a way to optimize it (using an existing
     commands or create your own).
  3. Make it a habit.

For example, I use Wikipedia a lot when I browse. I would copy a word or
remember it, open a new tab, type "wikipedia.org" in a location bar, search for
the word by pasting it in the search field and pressing the search button or
hit the return key.

Vimperator allows us to define key mappings. Here is what I did for my
Wikipedia pattern.

.. sourcecode:: javascript
  
  map ww :js open("wikipedia " + buffer.getCurrentWord(),\
             liberator.NEW_TAB) <CR>

Now the same action of looking up a word in wikipedia is reduced to clicking on
a word and pressing "ww". When done "d" will close the newly open tab. Making
it a habit is a matter of time and left as an exercise to the reader.

Vimperator opened a wide range of possibilities which were only wishes a couple
of days ago. Did you sometimes try to concentrate on some text but the images
around the text were so distracting you wished they disappear? No problem, just
put the following text in your vimperatorrc file (~/.vimperatorrc on UNIX)

.. sourcecode:: javascript

  :js << EOF
    hide_images = function() {
      var images = window.content.document.getElementsByTagName("img")
      for each(var image in images){
        image.style.visibility = 'hidden'
      }
    }
  EOF

  map gx :js hide_images() <CR>

Now pressing "gx" will make all the images on the current page
disappear and you can read the text visually undisturbed.


Conclusion
----------

Vimperator makes the browsing more efficient and it opens a possibility of
customizing Firefox without writing a full add-on. Being powerfull it requires
some learning time with great rewards.

